M. William Shake-speare His History, of King Lear.
Enter Kent, Gloster, and Bastard.
Kent.
I Thought the King had more affected the Duke of Albany, then Cornwell.
Glost.
It did alwaies seeme so to us, but now in the division of the kingdomes, it appeares not which of the Dukes he values most, for equalities are so weighed, that curiositie in neither, can make choise of eithers moytie.
Kent.
Is not this your sonne, my Lord?
Glost.
His breeding sir hath beene at my charge, I have so often blusht to ackowledge him, that now I am braz'd to it.
Kent.
I cannot conceive you.
Glost.
Sir, this young fellowes mother Could, whereupon shee grew round wombed, and had indeed Sir a sonne for her cradle, ere she had a husband for her bed, doe you smell a fault?
Kent.
I cannot wish the fault undone, the issue of it being so proper.
Glost.
But I have sir a sonne by order of the Law, some yeare elder then this, who yet is no deerer in my account, though this knave came something fawcely to the world before hee was sent for, yet was his mother faire, there was good sport at his making, &amp; the whoreson must be acknowledged, do you know this noble gentleman, Edmond?

Bast.
No my Lord.
Glost.
My Lord of Kent, remember him hereafter, as my honourable friend.
Bast.
My services to your Lordship.
Kent.
I must love you, and sue to know you better.
Bast.
Sir, I shall study deserving.
Glost.
Hee hath beene out nine yeares, and away hee shall againe, the King is comming.
Sound a Sennet, Enter one bearing a Coronet, then Lear, then the Dukes of Albany, and Cornwall, next Gonorill, Regan, Cordelia, with followers.
Lear.
Attend the Lords of France and Burgundy, Gloster.
Glost.
I shall, my Liege.
Lear.
Meane time we will expresse our darker purposes.
The map there; know we have divided
In three our kingdome: and tis our first intent,
To shake all cares and busines from our state,
Confirming them on younger yeares,
The two great Princes, France and Burgundy,
Great ryvals in our yongest daughters love,
Long in our Court have made their amorous sojourne,
And here are to be answerd; tell me my daughters,
Which of you shall we say doth love us most,
That we, our largest bountie may extend,
Where merit doth most challenge it:
Gonorill our eldest borne, speake first?
Gon.
Sir, I love you more then word can wield the matter,
Dearer then eye-sight, space, and libertie,
Beyond what can be valued rich or rare,
No lesse then life; with grace, health, beauty, honour,
As much a childe ere loved, or father friend,
A love that makes breath poore, and speech unable,
Beyond all manner of so much I love you.
Cor.
What shall Cordelia doe, love and be silent.
Lear.
Of all these bounds, even from this line to this,
With shady forrests, and wide-skirted Meades
We make thee Lady, to thine and Albanies issue,

Be this perpetuall, what saies our second daughter?
Our deerest Regan, wife to Cornwall, speake?
Reg.
Sir I am made of that selfe-same mettall that my sister is,
And prize me at her worth in my true heart,
I find she names my very deed of love, onely shee came short,
That I professe my selfe an enemy to all other joyes,
Which the most precious square of sense professes,
And find I am alone felicitate, in your deere highnes love.
Cord.
Then poore Cord., &amp; yet not so, since I am sure
My love's more richer then my tongue.
Lear.
To thee and thine hereditarie ever
Remaine this ample third of our faire kingdome,
No lesse in space, validity, and pleasure,
Then that confirm'd on Gonorill, but now our joy,
Although the last, not least in our deere love,
What can you say, to win a third, more opulent
Then your Sisters?
Cord.
Nothing my Lord.
Lear.
How, nothing can come of nothing, speake againe.
Cord.
Unhappy that I am, I cannot heave my heart into my mouth, I love your Majesty according to my bond, no more nor lesse.
Lear.Goe too, goe too, mend your speech a little,
Least you may mar your fortunes.
Cord.
Good my Lord,
You have begot me, bred me, loved me,
I returne those duties backe as are right fit,
Obey you, love you, and most honour you,
Why have my sisters husbands, if they say they love you all?
Happely when I shall wed, that Lord whose hand
Must take my plight, shall cary halfe my love with him,
Halfe my care and duty, sure I shall never
Mary like my sisters, to love my father all.
Lear.
But goes this with thy heart?
Cord.
I good my Lord.
Lear.
So yong and so untender.
Cor.
So young my Lord and true.
Lear.
Well let it be so, thy truth then be thy dower,
For by the sacred radience of the Sunne,
The mistresse of Heccat and the might:
By all operation of the orbs,
From whome we doe exist and cease to be,
Heere I desclaime all my paternall care,
Propinquitie and property of bloud,
And as a stranger to my heart and me
Hould thee from this for ever. the barbarous Scythyan,
Or he that makes his generation
Messes to gorge his appetite
Shall be as well neighbour'd, pittyed, and relieved
As thou my sometime daughter.
Kent.
Good my Liege.
Lear.
Peace Kent, come not between the Dragon &amp; his wrath
I lov'd her most, and thought to set my rest
On her kinde nursery, hence and avoide my sight?
So be my grave my peace as here I give,
Her fathers heart from her, call France, who stirres?
Call Burgundy, Cornwell, and Albany,
With my two daughters dower digest this third,
Let pride, which she cals plainnes, marrie her:
I doe invest you joyntly in my powre,
Preheminence, and all the large effects
That troope with Majestie, our selfe by Monthly course
With reservation of an hundred knights,
By you to be sustany'd, shall our abode
Make with you by due turnes, onely we shall retaine
The name and all the additions to a King,
The sway, revenue, execution of the rest,
Beloved sonnes be yours, which to confirme,
This Coronet part betwixt you.
Kent.
Royall Lear,
Whom I have ever honor'd as my King,
Loved as my Father, as my Master followed,
As my great Patron thought on in my prayers.
Lear.
The bow is bent &amp; drawen make from the shaft.
Kent.
Let it fall rather,
Though the forke invade the region of my heart,
Be Kent unmannerly when Lear is man,
What wilt thou doe ould man, think'st thou that dutie
Shall have dread to speake, when power to flatteryie bowes,
To plainnes honours bound when Majesty stoops to folly,
Reserve thy doome, and in thy best consideration
Checke this hideous rashnes, answere my life
My judgement, thy yongest daughter does not love thee least,
Nor are those empty hearted whose low, sound
Reverbs no hollownes.
Lear.
Kent on thy life no more.
Kent.
My life I never held but as a pawne
To wage against thy enemies, nor feare to lose it
Thy safty being the motive.
Lear.
Out of my sight.
Kent.
See better Lear, and let me still remaine
The true blanke of thine eye.
Lear.
Now by Appollo,
Kent.
Now by Appollo, King thou swear'st thy Gods in vaine.
Lear.
Vassall, recreant.
Kent.
Doe, kill thy Physicion
And the fee bestow upon the foule disease,
Revoke thy doome, or whilst I can vent clamour
From my throat, ile tell thee thou dost evill.
Lear.
Heare me, on thy allegeance heare me?
Since thou hast fought to make us breake our vow,
Which we durst never yet; and with straied pride,
To come betweene our sentence and our powre,
Which nor our nature nor our place can beare,
Our potency made good, take they reward,
Foure dayes we doe allot thee for provision,
To shield thee from diseases of the world,
And on the fift to turne thy hated backe
Upon our kingdome, if on the tenth day following,
Thy banisht trunke be found in our dominions,
The moment is thy death, away, by Jupiter,
This shall not be revokt.
Kent.
Why fare thee well king, since thus thou wilt appeare,
Friendship lives hence, and banishment is here,
The Gods to their protection take the maide,
That rightly thinkes, and hath most justly said,
And your large speeches may your deedes approve,
That good effects may spring from words of love:
Thus Kent O Princes, bids you all adew,
Heele shape his old course in a countrie new.