CHAPTER  I
Coonardoo was singing. Sitting under dark bushes overhung with curdy white blossom, she clicked two small sticks together, singing:
"Towera chinima poodinya, Towera jinner mulbeena . . ."
Over and over again, in a thin reedy voice, away at the back of her head, the melody flowed like water run-ning over smooth pebbles in a dry creek bed. Winding and falling, the words rattled together and flew eerily, as if she were whispering to herself, exclaiming, and in awe of the kangaroos who came over the range and made a dance with their little feet in the twilight, before they began to feed.
"Towera chinima poodinya, Towera inner mulbeena, Poodinyoober mulbeena."
It was no more than a twitter in the shadow of dark bushes near the veranda; a twitter with the clicking of small sticks. Coonardoo was not supposed to be there at all. Everybody was asleep in the long house of mud bricks and corrugated iron, and under the brushwood sheds beyond the kala miah. But Coonardoo did not want to sleep.
A little aboriginal girl about nine years old in a faded blue gina-gina, she sat there, part of the shadows, with her dark skin, fair hair, and brown eyes shadowed across the cornea. Clicking and singing, she watched the plains, the wide shallow pan of red earth under iron stone pebbles which spread out before her to the furry edge of the mulga, grey-green, under pale blue sky.
There was not a breath of wind. The windmills struck hard lines against the sky, their fans motionless, although roofs of the buggy shed, harness-room and smithy shivered in the heat. Stones on the plains, glistening in the clear white light, shimmered and danced together.
A crested pigeon, on the bough of a dead tree beside the garden, seemed to be watching the plains too. He sat there under the brush of dead twigs, his tail stuck out like a rudder, tipping backwards and forwards.
Yellow moths drifted down from the white gum blossom. Its fragrance of dry grass and honey made Coonardoo feel sleepy. And she had decided not to sleep, but to watch the plains for first sight of the horses and buggy coming from Nuniewarra.
Her eyes fluttered after the moths. She could see low brown huts down there beside the well, a deep narrow well the Gnarler had dug long ago, at a little distance from the creek. Coonardoo they called it, the dark well, or the well in the shadows. Coonardoo had been named after the well near which she was born. The huts were the huts of her people.
Trunks of gum trees were chalk white all along the dry bed of the creek, and beyond the creek, bare and red, soared the ridge of dog-toothed hills, their lower slopes tawny with spinifex. Horses and a buggy from Nuniewarra—to-morrow they would be taking Youie across the creek and away over the ridge. Away and 10 away by a long winding track across the plains, through those stretches of country where mulga was standing, stiff and shining as metal, so long it had been dead and bleaching in the sun. Away and away, further than Coonardoo could think, beyond blue backs of the hills, mulga scrub, and again away, and away, to the sea.
"Towera chinima poodinya . . ." 
Coonardoo sang with sobbing breaths. It was so far that Youie was going, and for so long. She wailed with fear of it all. Her thought could not follow where he was going.
"Poodinyoober mulbeena, mulbeena, mulbeena!" she wailed, while yellow moths beat the ah* before her, black markings of their wings flickering, jiggling with little feet of the kangaroos and white threads of the blossom which were falling. Little feet, fluttering wings, threads of falling blossom wreathed a cobwebby sleepiness over her. Very drowsily, the faint reedy voice twanged. Coonardoo's head drooped, the fine silky jet of curled lashes swept her cheek. Her singing ran out, and started again in a flurry.
Coonardoo shook herself and sat up. She was deter--mined not to go to sleep.
But nothing was stirring on the wide stretch of the plains before her, except the tail of the crested pigeon in that dead tree down beside the garden gate. It tipped backwards and forwards as he sat, red legs clasping a slim branch.
"Towera jinner mulbeena . . ." 
Coonardoo's fingers grasped the little sticks she was holding tightly. They clicked faster and harder. She was 11 very eager to be awake and ready to play with Youie when he ran out from the house.
Was he not going away to-morrow? Going to school? And they would play no more in the garden down there near the windmill. The garden with its rows of cab-bages, turnips, lettuces and onions, all the bright green vegetables Mrs. Bessie was so proud of. "Mumae" the blacks called her, because Hughie did as soon as he could talk. Mumae in their dialect meant a father, and was not Mrs. Bessie father and mother to her son, the woman master of Wytaliba since Ted Watt had died so long ago, before Hugh could speak? Soon after he was born indeed.
The pigeon flew off with a whirra of grey silken wings. What had he seen? Yukki! There was Youie running through the kitchen on to the veranda.
Coonardoo's singing bubbled away as Hugh stood on the veranda, fresh from his shower, a small boy of about her own age, tucking blue trousers over a calico shirt, torn and all the colour washed out of it.
"Tani wali,* Coonardoo!" he called, sun-red legs wide apart, sunburnt chubby face and snub-skinned nose, turned outwards. Blue-eyed, very assured and bossy, he searched for Coonardoo, knowing she was somewhere near; and saw her creeping from under the dark bushes.
"Comin', You," she called. She started to run, and they raced together for the
swing gate of the garden, lifted the wire hoop holding the gate to the fence of wire netting which surrounded Mrs. Bessie's green plot, and let themselves into the garden. Two other children trotted up from the uloo, a tall loutish boy and a little fat girl, younger than Coo-- nardoo. They pushed back the gate Hugh and Coonardoo had left swinging, and went into the garden.
"Hullo, you fellers I" Sharp and scratchy, Hugh's voice rose. "You watch me!"
He ran and turned head over heels in a patch of newly turned red earth. The black children shrieked and screamed their applause.
"Now you, Coonardoo! And then Wanna and then the little fat grub," Hugh ordered.
Coonardoo ran, her blue gina-gina wrapping itself round the thin brown sticks of her legs. Over she went, legs waving in the air. Hugh shouted delightedly.
"Good man! Good man, Coonardoo!" "Bardi? Bardi now?" cried the little fat girl, jump--ing excitedly.                               {
"No. Wanna, next." Wanna, the big boy, ape-like, with sore eyes, a mop of
dark dusty hair, calico slacks once white now gingery grey with grease and red dust, took his run, turned and rolled clumsily.
"Now you, Bardi!" Bardi, who was named after the fat white grubs the
blacks like to eat, could scarcely run she was gurgling and chuckling so. The other children danced and screamed hilariously as she tumbled over in the dust.
Hugh ran again to show how the thing was done. Coonardoo followed him, light and fleet; her legs waved in the air; she jumped up, shaking red dust from her fair hair.
Over and over again, with shrieks of joy and clatter of laughter, eager gleeful chatter, the children ran, threw themselves on their hands, swung over and jumped up, till wearying of the game, Hugh dashed off 13 crying: "Narlu! Narlu!" and the little girls followed him with Wanna in pursuit.
Round and round the garden they chased, jumping the cabbages, in and out between beds of onions, turnips, and lettuces, under vines Mumae had trained against the fence, and through the legs of the windmill. Bardi was narlu, then Coonardoo, and then Hugh; and he was a very fierce wild spirit of an eagle-hawk chasing little birds, whom the blacks feared and fled in terror of, through all the fun and laughter of the game.
Suddenly, in full flight, Coonardoo stood still. "Sam comin'," she called. Hugh, Bardi and Wanna looked out to the horizon.
Against misty clustering trees beside the creek crossing, a puff of dust had risen.
"Sam comin'," they chorused all together. In the long low house of whitewashed mud bricks and
corrugated iron, there was a sleepy rustle and stir. Gins who had been asleep in the shade of brushwood shelters on tall sapling posts sat up and looked out across the plains. Bandogera took a pipe from the pocket of her gina-gina, bent over, lifted a stick from smouldering embers of the fire and put it to her pipe. Meenie stood looking out to the crossing for a moment, then she stalked over to the house, a toll stately figure in her long dress of dark blue dungaree.
Mumae stepped out of her room on to the veranda and looked across at the moving dust.
"Meenie," she called sharply and walked with short quick steps along the veranda, a clear-cut figure in her white dress and low-heeled black shoes.
Dust of an approaching buggy and horses swirled across the plain. The children ran to open a gate in the fence below the garden. 14
"Cock-Eyed Bob with Sam," Coonardoo commented as horses and buggy jolted and bounded towards them. "Arra, other feller, maybe."
Strangers came so rarely to Wytaliba that to see a buggy and horses arrive was a game in itself. Not that Sam Geary was altogether a stranger to the children. They knew him well enough and he knew them, by name, even.
As the old-fashioned high buggy rattled and clashed to a standstill before Wytaliba homestead, he looked back at the gate and at the children running after the buggy.
"Coonardoo, old Joey Koonarra's kid, isn't she?" he asked the aboriginal boy beside Bob. "Maria, her mother . . . the one that died and there was all the fuss about, couple of years ago?"
"Eeh-mm," the boy replied, taking the reins and glancing away as Mrs. Watt came out to meet Geary.
